---
title: Implementing Workflows on Google App Engine Standard Environment with Fantasm
description: Learn how to implement Workflows on Google App Engine standard environment with Fantasm.
author: squee1945
tags: App Engine, Task Queue
date_published: 03/01/2011
---
*Jason A. Collins & Shawn Rusaw (VendAsta Technologies, Inc.)*

*March 2011*

*Python SDK: 1.4.0*

## Background

Any application developer who has built an application of any size has had to
deal with workflows. A workflow is a sequence of steps required to achieve an
overall process. The workflow can contain conditional logic and thus have
branches or loops. Workflows can be large and may span many seconds, minutes,
hours or even days. Because of this fact, workflows must also be resilient and
lightweight.

Google App Engine provides APIs that are the
building blocks for a wide array of applications. One API in particular,
[Task Queue API][task_queue], provides mechanisms to queue work which allows a
workflow to be separated into discrete steps. Additionally, the Task Queue API
provides built-in retry mechanisms; if a particular task fails, the job is
re-queued and will be tried later. The Task Queue API provides the essential
tools necessary to build resilient and scalable workflows.

[task_queue]: https://cloud.google.com/appengine/docs/python/taskqueue

Large-scale systems can often have correspondingly large-scale workflows. While
Task Queue has the necessary building blocks, it does not directly provide
a facility to build these workflows in a normal, predictable manner. On the
contrary, the flexibility of Task Queue, while powerful, often leads to a
spiderweb of process flows and subtle differences in implementations.

These types of systems, as you can imagine, are notoriously difficult to trace
and debug. Changing these systems is equally difficult as race conditions and
other hidden dependencies may emerge.

## Introducing Fantasm

We at [VendAsta Technologies][vendasta] have developed [Fantasm][fantasm] as an
open-source tool to help with this dilemma. Fantasm is a Python library that
allows developers to build workflows that harness the capabilities of the Task
Queue API and the App Engine infrastructure without needing to be concerned with
the actual Task Queue code.

[vendasta]: http://vendasta.com/
[fantasm]: https://github.com/iki/fantasm

Fantasm uses the finite state machine model of computing. A developer designs a
workflow as a set of states with transitions between them. Each workflow becomes
a machine with a single initial state and at least one final state. States are
connected by transitions which allow machines to branch and loop. Each state is
responsible to emit an event which identifies which transition to follow next.

States have actions which contain developer code. As a developer, you are free
to execute any legal Python code within the action (subject to App Engine quotas
and restrictions) as long as you return the event to tell Fantasm where to go
next.

Each finite state machine instance has an execution context; each state (and
thus your action code) has the ability to read and modify this context. The
context is made available to all subsequent states in the machine instance. The
context is essentially a dictionary in which you can place arbitrary values,
like partially computed results or keys to Datastore entries.

## Comparing and contrasting the Pipeline API

The [App Engine Pipeline API][pipeline_api] is aimed at
solving very similar issues as Fantasm: namely, leveraging the TaskQueue API to
harness the power of the distributed, massively-scalable App Engine
infrastructure to implement regular, testable and operationally accessible
workflows. The Pipeline API uses code to define its workflows, while Fantasm
specifies its workflows with a declarative YAML file format. Both have
advantages, which are summarized briefly as follows.

[pipeline_api]: https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/appengine-pipelines

The advantage of Fantasm is the simplicity and strictness of the workflow
definition. Declarative finite state machines are deterministic and can be
verified as correct. They can be very simple to describe. The framework offers a
great entry point into building scalable workflows.

The Pipeline API's advantage is flexibility. The workflows it describes can be
deep, recursive, and non-deterministic. The framework focuses on how parallel
work fans-out and fans-in, which is especially useful for advanced users but can
be confusing for newbies.

Thus, Fantasm is an excellent launch pad for building an understanding of how to
decompose a workflow into the appropriate chunk size as well as gaining a solid
footing in how to build idempotent states.

## Designing a workflow

In designing a Fantasm workflow, you are essentially designing a finite state
machine. The states and transitions of a Fantasm machines are defined in YAML
markup. The YAML is placed in a file called `fsm.yaml` beside your `app.yaml`
file. You must take your overall workflow and decompose it into discrete chunks;
naming your states and choose appropriate "chunk sizes" will allow for
operational clarity and easy machine rewiring.

    # fsm.yaml
    state_machines:
    - name: MyMachine

    states:
    - name: InitialState
      action: InitialStateClass
      initial: True
      transitions:
      - to: ReviewAndRecoverState
        event: review
      - to: FinalState
        event: ok

    - name: ReviewAndRecoverState
      action: ReviewAndRecoverStateClass
      final: True
      transitions:
      - to: FinalState
        event: ok

    - name: FinalState
      action: FinalStateClass
      final: True

![State Machine Diagram][state_machine_diagram]

[state_machine_diagram]: https://storage.googleapis.com/gcp-community/tutorials/appengine-fantasm/fantasm-fsm.png

The above machine is a 3-state machine with one initial state (`InitialState`)
and two final states (`ReviewAndRecoverState` and `FinalState`). `InitialState`
can transition to either `ReviewAndRecoverState` or `FinalState`, and
`ReviewAndRecoverState` may optionally transition to `FinalState` or simply stop.

The decisions on how to transition are defined by the events emitted. The events
are emitted by developer code housed in the classes `InitialStateClass`,
`ReviewAndRecoverStateClass` and `FinalStateClass`. Fantasm takes care of
invoking these classes and their methods at the appropriate time. The above
diagram can be automatically generated by the Fantasm framework using the URL
`/fantasm/graphviz/[your machine name]/`, e.g., `/fantasm/graphviz/MyMachine/`.

## Understanding Task Queue concepts

Though Fantasm strives to hide Task Queue coding from the developer, it is
important to understand some of the key concepts in order to make smart choices
in your machine design. Under the hood, Fantasm effectively uses a Task Queue
task for each transition between states. This means that if the code in a state
action fails (i.e., raises an exception), that transition will be requeued and
retried according to the normal Task Queue retry policy. This policy includes an
almost immediate retry followed by an exponential backoff; every task in a retry
state will be attempted at least once per day.

This has some direct implications on machine design. First, and most
importantly, you should build a state action that is [idempotent][idempotent].
Knowing that a state will be retried on a failure, you must write state action
code that is safe to be rerun possibly many times. In particular, you need to
think about the side-effects of your code — writing a record to Cloud Datastore,
sending an email, `POST`ing something to an external server — and take
appropriate precautions.

[idempotent]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Idempotent

This leads to the second implication on machine design: strive to keep your
state action code small and with a single side-effect step that is performed
essentially as the last part of your action code. If there is very little or no
code after your side-effect action, there is little opportunity for exceptions
to be raised which would cause your side-effect to be re-executed on the task
retry.

There are other techniques to achieve idempotency, but this approach is usually
the easiest. It is important to note that any changes to the machine context
made in state action code that raises an exception are not present on the retry.
So, for example, you can write a boolean flag into the context indicating that
an email had been sent, but if an exception is raised later in the state action
code, that flag will not be present on the retry. The context is only updated on
a successful state execution.

As a final note, it is important to know that Task Queue task size is limited to
10kB. Machine context is serialized into the task on each transition. Therefore,
your machine context is subject to this 10kB limitation. If you need to pass
large contexts between states of a machine, you will likely have to write this
context to Cloud Datastore and pass a key on the context instead.

## Starting a machine

Once you have your machine built, you need to kick it off. Fantasm machines are
started simply by requesting a URL. This URL has the form
`/fantasm/fsm/YOUR_MACHINE_NAME`. You can add query args to this URL and these
args will be present in your machine context. For example, you could invoke the
above machine using `/fantasm/fsm/MyMachine?arg1=value`. Your state action code
has access to this value via the machine context:

    class InitialStateClass(object):
        def execute(self, context, obj): # called by Fantasm
            arg1 = context['arg1'] # query args become part of the machine context
            if arg1 == 'something':
                # execute method returns the event to dispatch, driving the transition
                return 'ok'
            else:
                return 'review'

The Task Queue API allows tasks to use either `POST` or `GET`. Fantasm will
preserve whatever mechanism was used to start the machine, meaning if you start
the machine with a `GET`, all of the machine transitions will use `GET`. A `GET`
request is helpful when functionally testing a machine because the machine
context is present (as query args) in your log files, however, you are subject
to URL length restrictions. Due to these restrictions, larger contexts are
essentially forced to use `POST` invocations; you can also indicate the desired
method by specifying `&method=POST` when invoking the machine.

## Fanning out

At [a talk given by Brett Slatkin][talk] at Google I/O 2010, we were formally
introduced to a pair of concepts: fan-in and fan-out. App Engine developers who
worked in large scale applications likely recognized the basic underpinnings of
these concepts, in particular the most common form of fan-out, continuation.
This is a technique where you take a large dataset, typically the results of a
datastore query, read a chunk of it and pass the rest of it to another App
Engine instance using Task Queue, and then operate over your chunk. On the
second App Engine instance, the handler of the task performs the same operation.
Using this technique, in particular passing the dataset forward before operating
over it, allows many App Engine instances to work in parallel to process the
dataset. This is an important and key part of the power of App Engine.

[talk]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zSDC_TU7rtc

Fantasm provides mechanisms to make continuation very easy to implement. In your
YAML, you can denote a state as being a continuation. If you do so, in addition
to writing code for your state action, you also need to implement a continuation
method. While the state action code is responsible for returning an event to
dispatch, the continuation method is responsible for returning a token. This
token is passed to the next invocation of the continuation method on the next
App Engine instance.

After the continuation is run (and Fantasm fires up another App Engine instance
to handle the next continuation via Task Queue), your state action code is
executed. If you need to pass information from your continuation method to your
action method, you can use the `obj` dictionary. The `obj` dictionary differs
from the machine context in that it is scoped to a single task invocation. Items
on the `obj` dictionary are never serialized and are not passed from state to
state. A lot of these concepts will be clearer with an example.

## Email subscription example

Imagine that we have a large list of subscribers to whom we would like to send
an email. While this is naively a simple loop and a call to the Mail API, we
need to consider the unhappy path. What happens if something unexpected happens
half way through? Who received the message, and who did not? How do we recover?

It is these issues that Fantasm helps to overcome. Imagine we have a simple
machine like the following:

    state_machines:
    - name: SendSubscriberEmail

    states:
    - name: SendEmail
      action: SendEmail
      continuation: True
      initial: True
      final: True

The `SendEmail` state is going to be responsible to send a single email. The
`continuation` flag indicates that this state will implement a continuation
method which will cause many App Engine instances to be spun up to process this
event. In Fantasm, a continuation effectively causes multiple instances of the
finite state machine to be created, one for each continuation token. A
continuation state need not be a final state, but be aware that after a
continuation, possibly many machines are in-flight; we'll see below how we can
combine these machines back together.

To finish the above machine, we need to write a continuation method and an
action method. Recall the continuation method is responsible to return a token
that will be passed to the next continuation method on a subsequent App Engine
instance. The action method will perform our intended side-effect of sending the
email. Normally, it is responsible to emit an event to drive the machine
instance forward, but in this case the state is denoted as a final state, so no
event is emitted.

    class SendEmail(object):
        def continuation(self, context, obj, token=None):
            """Execute a query using an optional cursor, and
                store a single result in obj['subscriber']"""
            query = Subscriber.all()
            if token:
                query.with_cursor(token)
            subscriber = query.fetch(1)
            obj['subscriber'] = subscriber  # obj dict passes info to execute() method
            return query.cursor  # return token for next continuation() method

        def execute(self, context, obj):
            """Send an email to a single subscriber"""
            subscriber = obj['subscriber']
            if subscriber:  # possible none were returned
                # create email contents, perhaps with content from datastore, etc.
                # . . .
                mail.send_mail(to=subscriber.email, ...)
                # note: this 'side-effect' performed as last step for idempotency

For a large list of subscribers, you will see a Task Queue for each, and very
likely a large number of App Engine instances involved in processing these
tasks. Correspondingly, you will see a large, though likely brief, spike on your
App Engine dashboard (see tail-end of figure below). To start the machine, we
make a request to the machine URL: `/fantasm/fsm/SendSubscriberEmail/`.

![QPS Screenshot][qps_screenshot]

[qps_screenshot]: https://storage.googleapis.com/gcp-community/tutorials/appengine-fantasm/fantasm-qps.png

Congratulations! You've just unleashed the power of App Engine and fan-out
scalability on your large-dataset workflow. Also, because of Fantasm and Task
Queue retry mechanisms, if any of the individual emails fails to send, it will
be retried until it succeeds.

## Counting it up

Imagine that we want to count how many emails are sent in the above machine. A
naive implementation would add some lines of code after our `send_email()`
invocation to increment a counter in Datastore. Since we know that many machines
are processing this dataset, we're going to require a transaction to increment
the counter safely. So we might write something like this:

    class EmailBatch(db.Model):
        counter = db.IntegerProperty(default=0)

    def execute(self, context, obj):
        # ...
        send_mail(to=subscriber.email, ...)


        def tx():
            batch = EmailBatch.get_by_key_name('1') # key is simplified for example
            if not batch:
                batch = EmailBatch(key_name='1')
            batch.counter += 1
            batch.put()

        db.run_in_transaction(tx)

While this code works fine in the happy path, we need to consider what possible
failures may occur. Transactional updates to the Cloud Datastore are expensive and
slow (use 1 transaction per second as a rule of thumb), so there is a high
likelihood of an exception being thrown in the code after the `send_email()`.
When this occurs, our task is requeued, and on the retry, the `execute()` method
is run again, sending another identical email to the same recipient! Not good.

Our first step is to address this is to introduce another state to our machine:

    state_machines:
    - name: SendSubscriberEmail

    states:
    - name: SendEmail
      action: SendEmail
      continuation: True
      initial: True
      transitions:
        - to: CountEmail
        - event: ok

    - name: CountEmail
      action: CountEmail
      final: True

In this machine, we've added a second state `CountEmail`. After sending the
email, we will emit the event `ok` and drive the machine to the second, and
final, state `CountEmail`. Our code becomes:

    class SendEmail(object):
        def continuation(self, context, obj, token=None):
            # no change to this method

        def execute(self, context, obj):
            subscriber = obj['subscriber']
            mail.send_mail(to=subscriber.email, ...)

            # only change is to emit event ok
            return 'ok'

    class CountEmail(object):
        def execute(self, context, obj):
            """Transactionally update our batch counter"""
            def tx():
                batch = EmailBatch.get_by_key_name('1') # key simplified for example
                if not batch:
                    batch = EmailBatch(key_name='1')
                batch.counter += 1
                batch.put()

            db.run_in_transaction(tx)

We have now separated our two side-effects: sending an email and updating our
batch counter. We have idempotent states that are safe to retry without any
unintended actions occurring.

## Fanning in

Continuing our example, a final improvement can be made. Recall that fanning out
with our continuation method caused many instances of machines to be created,
one for each email. Datastore transactions, as mentioned, are expensive; yet we
are using one for each email to count up the number of emails sent. It would be
more efficient to combine many of these machines together so that we can
increment our counter by many multiples in a single transaction. Fantasm
provides tools to achieve this.

In order to fan machines together, we demarcate a state as being a `fan_in`
state. Machines instances in the same state with the same event being dispatched
are fanned together so that they can be processed as a group. The `fan_in`
number specified is the number of seconds to wait and collect machines in the
same state.

Our machine YAML (`fsm.yaml`) becomes the following:

    state_machines:
    - name: SendSubscriberEmail

    states:
    - name: SendEmail
      action: SendEmail
      continuation: True
      initial: True
      transitions:
        - to: CountEmail
        - event: ok

    - name: CountEmail
      action: CountEmail
      final: True
      fan_in: 3

The only change is the presence of the `fan_in` attribute. It means that every 3
seconds, all machines in the state `CountEmail` will be processed as a group.
The only difference to the state action code is that, instead of receiving a
single machine context, you will receive a list of machine contexts, one for
each machine being fanned in.

In this particular example, the number of machines fanning in represents the
number of emails successfully sent — a bit of a subtle point. Because of this,
we can use the length of the context list to increment our counter. Our state
action method becomes the following:

    class CountEmail(object):
        def execute(self, list_of_contexts, obj):
            """Transactionally update our batch counter"""

            def tx(count):
                batch = EmailBatch.get_by_key_name('1') # key simplified for example
                if not batch:
                  batch = EmailBatch(key_name='1')
                batch.counter += count
                batch.put()

            emails_sent = len(list_of_contexts)
            db.run_in_transaction(tx, emails_sent)

We now only have to execute a Datastore transaction once every 3 seconds. Fan-in
is a powerful technique to execute items in batch and is an important tool in
our scalability arsenal.

## Next steps

One of the motivations for Fantasm is operational regularity and visibility.
Today, the Fantasm implementation achieves this through regular URLs (with
visible context if invoking with `GET`) and task naming.

On the latter point, tasks are named for the machine instance name which
includes when the machine was created, as well as the current state and event
being dispatched. App Engine's Task Queue console displays these task names as
well as how many times they have been retried.

On the road map for Fantasm is statistical tracking of machine instances,
execution time, failure rates, state invocations. This will help find
long-running or fragile states. In addition, we intend to develop an operational
console highlighting machines that are currently in-flight and their current
state, possibly including a visual representation of the finite state machine.

## Summary

Fantasm is a framework that allows you to build scalable, resilient workflows
and leverages the Task Queue API to achieve retries as well as large scale-out
across multiple App Engine instances. We hope it is a benefit to your
organization. Additional features and docs can be found at its GitHub project
location: https://github.com/iki/fantasm.
